PEP: 9999
Title: Deep Immutability in Python
Author: Matthew Johnson <matjoh@microsoft.com>, Matthew Parkinson <mattpark@microsoft.com>, Sylvan Clebsch <sylvan.clebsch@microsoft.com>, Fridtjof Peer Stoldt <fridtjof.stoldt@it.uu.se>, Tobias Wrigstad <tobias.wrigstad@it.uu.se>
Sponsor: TBD
Discussions-To: TBD
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 27-Feb-2025
Python-Version: 3.12
Post-History: 
Resolution:


Abstract
========

This PEP proposes adding a mechanism for deep immutability to
Python via a new builtin called ``freeze(obj)``. This builtin
takes a reference to an object and recursively renders the object
and all objects it references immutable. (This is *deep*
immutability --- just making the first object immutable is called
*shallow* immutability.)

Deep immutability will provide stronger guarantees against
unintended modifications, improving correctness, security, and
parallel execution safety.

In this PEP, we rely
on the GIL to ensure the correctness of reference counts of 
immutable objects, but we have several planned memory management 
extensions.

Immutability in action:

.. code-block:: python

	class Foo: pass

	f = Foo()
	g = Foo()
	h = Foo()

	f.f = g
	g.f = h
	h.f = g # cycles are OK!

	g.x = "African Swallow" # OK
	freeze(f) # Makes, f, g and h immutable
	g.x = "European Swallow" # Throws immutability exception


Motivation
==========


Ensuring Data Integrity
-----------------------

Python programs frequently manipulate large, interconnected data
structures such as dictionaries, lists, and user-defined objects.
Unintentional mutations can introduce subtle and
difficult-to-debug errors. By allowing developers to explicitly
freeze objects and their transitive dependencies, Python can
provide stronger correctness guarantees for data processing
pipelines, functional programming paradigms, and API boundaries
where immutability is beneficial.


Immutable Objects can be Freely Shared Without Risk of Data Races
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Python’s Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) mitigates many data race
issues, but as Python evolves towards improved multi-threading and
parallel execution (e.g., subinterpreters and the exciting free-threaded Python
efforts), data races on shared mutable objects become a more
pressing concern. A deep immutability mechanism ensures that
shared objects are not modified concurrently, enabling safer
multi-threaded and parallel computation. Safe sharing of immutable
objects across multiple threads require deep immutability.
Consider the following code:

.. code-block:: python

	import threading

	data = [1, 2, 4, 8]
	length = len(data)
	pair = (data, length)

	threading.Thread(target=print, args=(pair,)).start()

	del data[2]

The shallow immutability of the ``pair`` tuple prevents the
``data`` list from being swapped for another list, but the
list is not immutable. Thus, the ``print`` function in the
newly spawned thread will be racing with the deletion. In
Python 3.12, this is not a problem as the GIL prevents this
race. To ensure `container thread-safety
<https://peps.python.org/pep-0703/#container-thread-safety>`_,
PEP 703 proposes per-object locks instead. If ``pair`` was
frozen, the deletion would have caused an error.

	TODO: draw picture

See also the discussion about extensions further down in this
document.

Deep immutability can be implemented efficiently. We discuss
a read-barrier based approach in the alternatives.


Optimisations and Caching Benefits
----------------------------------

Immutable objects provide opportunities for optimisation, such as
structural sharing, memoization, and just-in-time (JIT)
compilation techniques (specialising for immutable data, e.g.
fixed shape, fewer barriers, inlining, etc.). Freezing objects can
allow Python to implement more efficient caching mechanisms and
enable compiler optimisations that rely on immutability
assumptions. This PEP will permit such opportunities to go
beyond today's immutable objects (like ``int``, ``string``) and
*shallow* immutable objects (``tuple``, ``frozenset``).



Specification
=============

Changes to Python objects
-------------------------

Every Python object will have a flag that keeps track of its
immutability status. Details about the default value of
this flag is discussed further down in this document. 

The flag can be added without extending the size of the
Python object header.


Implementation of Immutability
------------------------------

Immutability is enforced through run-time checking. The macro
``Py_CHECKWRITE(op)`` is inserted on all paths that are guaranteed
to end up in a write to ``op``. The macro inspects the immutability
flag in the header of ``op`` and signals an error if the immutability
flag is set.

A typical use of this check looks like this:

.. code-block:: c

	if (!Py_CHECKWRITE(op)) {        // perform the check
	    PyErr_WriteToImmutable(op);  // raise the error if the check fails
	    return NULL;                 // abort the write
	}  
	... // code that performs the write


As writes are common but lack a common path that most writes to through
the PEP requires a ``Py_CHECKWRITE`` call, there are several places in
the CPython code base that are changed as a consequence of this PEP.
So far we have identified around 70 writes spread across a dozen files.


New Obligations on C Extensions
-------------------------------

Because our implementation builds on information available to the CPython
cycle detector, types defined through C code will support immutability 
"out of the box" as long as they use Python standard types to store
data.

C extensions with functions that directly writes to data which can be made
immutable should add the ``Py_CHECKWRITE`` macro shown above on all paths in the
code that lead to writes to that data. If C extensions manage their
data through Python dictionary objects, no changes are needed.

Python objects may define a ``__freeze__`` method which will be called 
after an object has been made immutable. This hook could then be used 
to freeze or otherwise manage any other state on the side that is
introduced through a C-extension.

C extensions that define data that is outside of the heap traced by the
CPython cycle detector should either manually implement freezing by using
``Py_CHECKWRITE`` and the ``__freeze__`` hook, or alternatively ensure
that all accesses to this data is *thread-safe*.


Freezing Type Which are Not Immutability-Aware
----------------------------------------------

**TODO** Solicit feedback from extension authors.

We could take a conservative stance and require that any C extension
that defines a type must explicitly opt-in to declare support for
immutability. Furthermore, we might interpret freezing strictly and
have freeze fail if freezing encounters a type that does not support
immutability. This gives us a "sound model" where a successful freeze
call results in deep immutability that can be trusted (modulo bugs in
the C extensions). The obvious downside is more work for the Python
community in order to leverage deep immutability.

That model can be relaxed by permitting strict and lax versions of
freeze to co-exist. For example if strict freezing is the default,
``freeze(o)`` will fail if ``o`` reaches a type ``T`` which does not support
freezing, whereas ``freeze(o, strict=False)`` would permit the resulting
object structure, which can still be mutated in ``T``.

Making strict false by default is additionally permissive, and still
allows programmers to opt-in to strict freezing when they so wish.

If freezing can fail to freeze an object we must decide whether to:

1. Abort and throw an exception
2. Leave it and live with the unsoundness
3. Nullify the reference to the non immutability-aware object 
4. ...something else

While alternative 3 will ensure that frozen objects are truly
immutable, it has the ugly side-effect that making something
immutable can mutate the heap. This seems to violate the "principle
of least surprise".

If freezing can be aborted, we also need to take a decision on in what
state we leave the system. Do we leave some structures *partially*
frozen? If we don't want that (which we probably don't), we need to
save a log of things to unfreeze in case of an error. This will add
to the cost of freezing things.


Examples of Uses of CHECKWRITE
------------------------------

Inspiration and examples can be found by looking at existing
uses of ``Py_CHECKWRITE`` in the CPython codebase. Two good
starting places are ```object.c`_`` and ```dictobject.c`_``.

.. _object.c: https://github.com/mjp41/cpython/pull/51/files#diff-ba56d44ce0dd731d979970b966fde9d8dd15d12a82f727a052a8ad48d4a49363
.. _dictobject.c: https://github.com/mjp41/cpython/pull/51/files#diff-b08a47ddc5bc20b2e99ac2e5aa199ca24a56b994e7bc64e918513356088c20ae

Deep Freezing Semantics
-----------------------

The ``freeze(obj)`` builtin works as follows:

1. It recursively marks ``obj`` and all objects reachable from ``obj``
   immutable.
2. If ``obj`` is already immutable (e.g., an integer, string, or a
   previously frozen object), the recursion terminates.
3. The freeze operation follows object references (relying on ``tp_traverse`` 
   in the type structs of the objects involved), including:

    * Object attributes (``__dict__`` for user-defined objects,
      ``tp_dict`` for built-in types).
    * Container elements (e.g., lists, tuples, dictionaries,
      sets).
    * The ``__class__`` attribute of an object (which makes freezing
      instances of user-defined classes also freeze their class
      and its attributes).
    * The ``__bases__`` chain in classes (freezing a class freezes its
      base classes).

5. Attempting to mutate a frozen object raises an exception (``NotWriteableError``).


Default (Im)Mutabiliy 
---------------------

Interned strings, numbers in the small integer cache, and tuples of
immutable objects are made immutable in this PEP. This is either
consistent with current Python semantics or backwards-compatible.

A reasonable design would make all numbers immutable, not just those
in the small integer cache. This should be properly investigated.


Consequences of Deep Freezing
=============================

* The most obvious consequence of deep freezing is that it can lead
  to surprising results when programmers fail to reason correctly
  about the object structures in memory and how the objects reference
  each other. For example, consider ``freeze(x)`` followed by
  ``y.f = 42``. If the object in ``x`` can reach the same object that
  ``y`` points to, then, the assignment will fail.
* Class Freezing: Freezing an instance of a user-defined class
  will also freeze its class. Otherwise, sharing an immutable object
  across threads would lead to sharing its *mutable* type object. Thus,
  freezing an object also freezes the type type object of its super
  classes.
* Metaclass Freezing: Since class objects have metaclasses,
  freezing a class may propagate upwards through the metaclass
  hierarchy.
* Global State Impact: Freezing an object that references global
  state (e.g., ``sys.modules``, built-ins) could inadvertently
  freeze critical parts of the interpreter.

As the above list shows, a side-effect of freezing an object is
that its type becomes frozen too. Consider the following program,
which is not legal in this PEP because it modifies the type of an
immutable object:

.. code-block:: c

	class Counter:
	  def __init__(self, initial_value):
	    self.value = initial_value
	  def inc(self):
	    self.value += 1
	  def dec(self):
	    self.value -= 1
	  def get(self):
	    return self.value

	c = Counter(0)
	c.get() # returns 0 
	freeze(c) # (1) -- this locks the value of the counter to 0
	... 
	Counter.get = lambda self: 42 # OK in CPython 3.12, throws exception with this PEP
	c.get() # returns 42 in CPython 3.12

With this PEP, the code above throws an exception on
Line (1) because the type object for the ``Counter`` type
is immutable. Our freeze algorithm takes care of this as
it follows the class reference from ``c``. If we did not
freeze the ``Counter`` type object, the above code would
work and the counter will *appear* to be mutable because
of the change to its class. 

The dangers of not freezing the type is apparent when considering
avoiding data races in a concurrent program. If a frozen counter
is shared between two threads, the threads are still able to
race on the ``Counter`` class type object.

As types are frozen, this problem is avoided. Note that
freezing a class needs to freeze its superclasses as well.


Subclassing Immutable Classes
-----------------------------

CPython classes hold references to their subclasses.
If immutability it taken literally, it would not be
permitted to create a subclass of an immutable type.
Because this reference is "accidental" and does not
get exposed to the programmer in any dangerous way,
we permit frozen classes to be subclassed (by mutable
classes). C.f. `Sharing Immutable Data Across Subinterpreters`_.


Freezing Function Objects
-------------------------

Freezing function objects and lambdas is suprisingly involved
because all function objects have a pointer to ``globals``.
Function objects can be thought of as regular objects whose
fields are its local variables -- some of which may be captured
from enclosing scopes.

Consider the following scenario:: python-code

	x = 0
	def foo():
        return x

	freeze(foo)
	... # some code, e.g. pass foo to another thread
	x = 1
	foo()

In the code above, the ``foo`` function object captures the ``x``
variable from its enclosing scope. While ``x`` happens to point to
an immutable object, the variable itself (the frame of the function object)
is mutable. Unless something is done to prevent it (see below!), passing
``foo`` to another thread will make the assignment ``x = 1`` a potential
data race.

We consider freezing of a function to freeze that function's
meaning at that point in time. In the code above, that means that
``foo`` gets its own copy of ``x`` which will have value of the
original at the time of freezing, in this case 0.

Thus, the assignment ``x = 1`` is still permitted as it will not affect
``foo``, and it may therefore not contribute to a data race. Furthermore,
the result of calling ``foo()`` will be 0 -- not 1!

This can be implemented by having ``x`` in ``foo`` point to a
fresh cell and then freezing the cell (and similar for global capture).

We believe that this design is a sweet-spot that is intuitive and
permissive.

Now consider freezing the following function:

.. code-block:: python-code

	x = 0
	def foo(a = False):
		if a:
			x = x + 1
			return x
		else:
			a = a + 1
			return a

	freeze(foo)
	foo(41)  # OK, returns 42
	foo()    # Throws NotWriteableError

This example illustrates two things. The first call to ``foo(41)``
shows that local variables on the frame of a frozen function are
mutable. The second call shows that captured variables are not.
Note that the default value of ``a`` will be frozen when ``foo``
is frozen. Thus, the problem of side-effects on default values
on parameters is avoided.

Frozen function objects that access globals, e.g. through a call
to ``globals()`` will throw an exception when called.


Implementation Details
======================

1. Introduce an ``is_immutable`` property on objects that tracks whether or
   not they are frozen. The status is accessible through ``_Py_ISIMMUTABLE``
   in the C API and in Python code through the ``isimmutable`` builtin.
2. Modify object mutation operations (``PyObject_SetAttr``,
   ``PyDict_SetItem``, ``PyList_SetItem``, etc.) to check the 
   flag and raise an error when appropriate.
3. Implement ``freeze(obj)``, ensuring it traverses object references
   safely, including cycle detection.
4. The builtin ``freezeglobals()`` freezes the globals dictionary and
   builtins. This is needed for multi-threaded scenarios such as
   `PEP 703`_ and our planned extensions.


Backward Compatibility
======================

This proposal is fully backward-compatible, as no existing Python
code will be affected unless it explicitly calls ``freeze(obj)``.
Frozen objects will raise errors only when mutation is attempted.


Performance Implications
========================

The cost of checking for immutability violations is
an extra dereference of checking the flag on writes.
There are implementation-specific issues, such as
various changes based on how and where the bit is stolen.


Alternatives Considered
=======================

1. Shallow Freezing: Only mark the top-level object as immutable.
   This would be less effective for ensuring true immutability
   across references. In particular, this would not make it safe
   to share the results of ``freeze()`` across threads without risking
   data-race errors. Shallow immutability is not strong enough to support 
   sharing immutable objects across subinterpreters (see extensions).
2. Copy-on-Write Immutability: Instead of raising errors on
   mutation, create a modified copy. However, this changes object
   identity semantics and is less predictable. Support for copy-on-write
   may be added later, if a suitable design can be found.
3. Immutable Subclasses: Introduce ImmutableDict, ImmutableList,
   etc., instead of freezing existing objects. However, this does
   not generalize well to arbitrary objects and adds considerable
   complexity to all code bases.
4. Deep freezing immutable copies as proposed in `PEP 351: The 
   freeze protocol <https://peps.python.org/pep-0351/>`_. That PEP
   is the spiritual ancestor to this PEP which tackles the
   problems of the ancestor PEP and more (e.g. meaning of
   immutability when types are mutable, immortality, etc).
5. Deep freezing replaces data races with exceptions on attempts to
   mutate immutable objects. Another alternative would be to keep
   objects mutable and build a data-race detector that catches read--write
   and write--write races. This alternative was rejected for two main
   reasons:

    1. It is expensive to implement: it needs a read-barrier to
       detect what objects are being read by threads to capture
       read--write races.
    2. While more permissive, the model suffers from non-determinism.
       Data races can be hidden in corner cases that require complex
       logic and/or temporal interactions which can be hard to
       test and reproduce.


Open Issues
===========

1. How does deep freezing interact with weak references?


Future Extensions
=================

This PEP is the first in a series of PEPs with the goal of delivering
a Data-Race Free Python that is theoretically compatible with, but 
notably not contigent on, `PEP 703`_ -- despite delivering 
multicore performance in Python.

This work will take place in the following discrete steps:

1. Atomic reference counting of immutable objects to permit 
   concurrent increments and decrements on shared object RC's.
2. Support for identifying and freeing cyclic immutable garbage
   using reference counting.
3. Support for sharing immutable data across subinterpreters. 
4. Support for sharing mutable data across subinterpreters,
   with dynamic ownership protecting against data races.
5. Support for behaviour-oriented concurrency.


Support for Atomic Reference Counting
-------------------------------------

As preparation for the extension `Sharing Immutable Data Across Subinterpreters`_,
we will add support for atomic reference counting for immutable objects. This
will complement work in `Simplified Garbage Collection for Immutable Object Graphs`_,
which aims to make memory management of immutable data more efficient.

When immutable data is shared across threads we must ensure that 
concurrent reference count manipulations are correct, which in turns
requires atomic increments and decrements. Note that since we are only
planning to share immutable objects across different GIL's, it is
*not* possible for two threads to read--write or write--write race
on a single field. Thus we only need to protect the reference counter
manipulations, avoiding most of the complexity of `PEP 703`_


Simplified Garbage Collection for Immutable Object Graphs
---------------------------------------------------------

In `previous work <https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3652024.3665507>`_,
we have identified that objects that make up cyclic immutable
garbage will always have the same lifetime. This means that a
single reference count could be used to track the lifetimes of
all the objects in such a strongly connected component (SCC).

We plan to extend the freeze builtin with a SCC analysis that
creates a designated (atomic) reference count for the entire
SCC, such that reference count manipulations on any object in
the SCC will be "forwarded" to that shared reference count.
This can be done without bloating objects by repurposing the
existing reference counter data to be used as a pointer to
the shared counter.

This technique permits handling cyclic garbage using plain
reference counting, and because of the single reference count
for an entire SCC, we will detect when all the objects in the
SCC expire at once.

This approach requires a second bit. Our `reference implementation`_
already steals this bit in preparation for this extension.


Sharing Immutable Data Across Subinterpreters
---------------------------------------------

We plan to extend the functionality of `multiple subinterpreters <https://peps.python.org/pep-0734/>`_
to *share* immutable data without copying. This is safe and
efficient as it avoids the copying or serialisation when
objects are transmitted across subinterpreters.

This change will require reference counts to be atomic (as
discussed above) and the subclass list of a type object to
be made thread-safe. Additionally, we will need to change
the API for getting a class' subclasses in order to avoid
data races.

This change requires modules loaded in one subinterpreter to be
accessible from another. Implementation details here are to be
discussed, but the version we have been working on is one in which
a side effect of calling ``freezeglobals()`` is that all
subsequent module imports are imported into the main
module and immediately frozen and shared across all subinterpreters.



Data-Race Free Python
---------------------

While useful on their own, all the changes above are building
blocks of Data-Race Free Python. Data-Race Free Python will
borrow concepts from ownership (namely region-based ownership,
see e.g. `Cyclone <https://cyclone.thelanguage.org/>`_) to make Python programs data-race free
by construction. Which will permit multiple subinterpreters to
share *mutable* state, although only one subinterpreter at a time
will be able to access (read or write) to that state. In theory,
this work could also be authored on-top of free-theaded Python (PEP 703).

It is important to point out that Data-Race Free Python is different
from `PEP 703`_, but aims to be fully compatible with that PEP, and
we believe that both PEPs can benefit from each other. In essence
`PEP 703`_'s focus is on making the CPython run-time resilient against
data races in Python programs: a poorly synchronized Python program
should not be able to corrupt reference counts, or other parts of
the Python interpreter. The complementary goal pursued by this PEP
is to make it impossible for Python programs to have data races.
Support for deeply immutable data is the first important step
towards this goal.


Reference Implementation
========================

`Available here <https://github.com/mjp41/cpython/pull/51>`_.


References
==========

* `PEP 703: Making the Global Interpreter Lock Optional in CPython <https://peps.python.org/pep-0703>`_
* `PEP 351: The freeze protocol <https://peps.python.org/pep-0351/>`_
* `PEP 734: Multiple Interpreters in the Stdlib <https://peps.python.org/pep-0734/>`_
* `PEP 683: Immortal Objects, Using a Fixed Refcount <https://peps.python.org/pep-0683/>`_

.. _PEP 703: https://peps.python.org/pep-0703
